TUNING-FREE STEP-SIZE ADAPTATION
Ashique Rupam Mahmood Richard S. Sutton Thomas Degris Patrick M. Pilarski
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
ABSTRACT
Incremental learning algorithms based on gradient descent are
effective and popular in online supervised learning, reinforce-
ment learning, signal processing, and many other application
areas. An oft-noted drawback of these algorithms is that they
include a step-size parameter that needs to be tuned for best
performance, which may require manual intervention and sig-
nificant domain knowledge or additional data. In many cases,
an entire vector of step-size parameters (e.g., one for each
input feature) needs to be tuned in order to attain the best per-
formance of the algorithm. To address this, several methods
have been proposed for adapting step sizes online. For exam-
ple, Sutton’s IDBD method can find the best vector step size
for the LMS algorithm, and Schraudolph’s ELK1 method,
an extension of IDBD to neural networks, has proven effec-
tive on large applications, such as 3D hand tracking. How-
ever, to date all such step-size adaptation methods have in-
cluded a tunable step-size parameter of their own, which we
call the meta-step-size parameter. In this paper we show that
the performance of existing step-size adaptation methods are
strongly dependent on the choice of their meta-step-size pa-
rameter and that their meta-step-size parameter cannot be set
reliably in a problem-independent way. We introduce a se-
ries of modifications and normalizations to the IDBD method
that together eliminate the need to tune the meta-step-size pa-
rameter to the particular problem. We show that the resulting
overall algorithm, called Autostep, performs as well or better
than the existing step-size adaptation methods on a number
of idealized and robot prediction problems and does not re-
quire any tuning of its meta-step-size parameter. The ideas
behind Autostep are not restricted to the IDBD method and
the same principles are potentially applicable to other incre-
mental learning settings, such as reinforcement learning.
1. STEP-SIZE ADAPTATION
In many application areas, data arrives abundantly as a stream
and must be processed on a moment-by-moment basis. Some
common examples of such application areas include online
supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and signal pro-
cessing. Learning algorithms that use data samples as soon
as available and that update their estimates incrementally are
among the most effective in these applications. These incre-
mental learning algorithms are typically based on gradient
descent and include one or more step-size parameters.
The Least Mean Squares (LMS) algorithm is one of the
most widely used incremental learning algorithms for online
supervised-learning applications. In the setting where the
LMS algorithm is commonly applied, data is considered to
arrive in a series of steps. At each step k, data is presented
as a vector of n input features x1,k, . . . , xn,k, where each
xi,k ∈ R, and as a single target output yk ∈ R. The target is
estimated as a weighted sum of the feature components. We
denote the error at step k as
δk = yk −
n
X
i=1
wi,kxi,k, (1)
where the wi,k ∈ R are learned weights. At each step the
LMS algorithm increments its weights proportional to the er-
ror and the corresponding feature:
wi,k+1 = wi,k + αδkxi,k,
where α > 0 is a scalar step-size parameter.
Although in the conventional LMS algorithm the step size
α is a scalar, better performance can be obtained if it is
a vector (a separate step-size parameter for each feature).
In either case, the problem of setting the parameter(s) and
the dependence of their best settings on the particularities
of the problem must be addressed. Several methods have
been proposed to set step-size parameters automatically.
Examples include the Incremental-Delta-Bar-Delta (IDBD)
method (Sutton, 1992a), which adapts a vector step size for
the LMS algorithm, and the ELK1 method (Schraudolph,
1999), which adapts the step-size parameters for neural net-
works (see also Sutton, 1981; Jacobs, 1988; Benveniste et
al., 1990). These methods have proven effective on several
large applications including 3D hand tracking (Bray et al.,
2004), brain–computer interfaces (Buttfield et al., 2006), and
real-time robot control (Schaal et al., 2001). These methods
all increment the components of the step-size parameter pro-
portional to an estimate of the partial derivative of the squared
error with respect to the step size, a sort of “meta” gradient
descent (Sutton, 1992a). The general idea is to update at each
step by
αi,k+1 = αi,k − µ
d
∂δ2
t
∂αi
, (2)
where µ > 0 is a scalar meta-step-size parameter.
Autostep!on!Each!Problem Averaged!over!All!Problems
0
1
IDBD!on!Each!Problem
MSE
Relative
to
Standard
LMS
Autostep
ALAP
SGD-QN
IDBD
SMD
RLS
K1
10-6
10-4
10-10
10-8
10-4
1
10-2
10-10
10-8
10-6 10-6
10-4
10-10
10-8
10-2
meta-step-size parameter meta-step-size parameter meta parameter
Fig. 1. Our main results. Left: A representative step-size adaptation method, IDBD, performs better than standard LMS (the
dotted line), but only if its meta-step-size parameter is varied substantially from problem to problem. Middle: Our new method,
Autostep, performs well on all problems at the same value of its meta-step-size parameter (≈10−2
). Right: If we restrict each
method to a single value of its meta parameter, then Autostep performs much better than all the other step-size adaptation
methods and the Recursive Least Squares (RLS) algorithm, and is more robust to the setting of its meta parameter.
2. DEPENDENCE ON THE META-STEP SIZE
Although step-size adaptation methods eliminate the need to
manually tune the step-size parameter, these methods intro-
duce a meta-step-size parameter which must itself be tuned.
In this section, we empirically demonstrate the dependence of
the existing step-size adaptation methods on their meta-step-
size parameters. We used two idealized supervised learning
problems and six robot prediction problems. The first ide-
alized problem is a benchmark nonstationary problem, taken
from Sutton (1992b). The second idealized problem is identi-
cal except that the variance of the target weights’ drift is 100
times larger. The robot prediction problems use a data set col-
lected by running a sensor-rich mobile robot inside a closed
testing environment for more than eight hours. This data con-
tains time records of 56 sensors over 3 million steps. The
data was divided into 30 sets for separate runs. The sensor
values were normalized such that their average was zero and
estimated variance was one. In each problem values of one
of the raw sensors at the next step were predicted by using
values of all the 56 normalized sensors at the previous step.
Six different sensors were picked as targets, each from a dif-
ferent class of sensors. As the sensor values varied frequently
over time due to the robot’s movements, these problems are
nonstationary and hence appropriate for step-size adaptation.
The data set is available online (RLAI, 2010).
On all problems, we applied the most prominent existing step-
size adaptation methods, including IDBD (Sutton, 1992a), K1
(Sutton, 1992b), ALAP (Almeida et al., 1998), SMD (Schrau-
dolph, 1999), and the method by Benveniste et al. (1990, see
also Kushner and Yang, 1995). All these methods follow
roughly the schema of (2). Performance for these methods
was measured by varying the meta-step-size values between
10−11
and 103
. The step size for all methods was initialized
to a standard, roughly tuned value—0.1/n for the idealized
problems and 0.0001/n for the robot problems (values an or-
der of magnitude larger than this resulted in divergence for
most methods). For each method on each problem, we mea-
sured the Mean Squared Error (MSE), averaged over time
steps and then averaged over 30 runs. Our final performance
measure, shown in Figure 1, is the ratio of the method’s MSE
to the MSE of the conventional LMS algorithm with its step-
size parameter set permanently to the standard values. We
refer to LMS with this setup as standard LMS.
The left panel of Figure 1 shows the dependence and sensitiv-
ity of IDBD to its meta-step-size parameter on all the prob-
lems. With a low meta-step size (e.g., 10−11
), IDBD is es-
sentially the same as standard LMS, and so its relative per-
formance was 1.0. Note that IDBD’s performance depended
strongly on its meta-step-size parameter. For example, for the
problem of predicting the robot’s acceleration sensor, the best
performance (lowest MSE) was achieved between 10−9
and
10−8
(leftmost blue curve) whereas, for the problem of pre-
dicting the current draw on the robot’s drive motor, the lowest
MSE was achieved for a meta-step size between 10−5
and
10−4
(red curve). This demonstrates that the best perform-
ing value of the meta-step-size parameter of IDBD shifts by
orders of magnitude across different problems. The ranges
of meta-step size that achieved good performance were also
narrow compared to the overall range of values that has to be
searched. Similar large shifts in the value of the best meta
parameter across problems were observed for all the other
methods except Autostep (middle panel), a new method that
we present in the next section. The right panel compares all
methods, averaged across problems, when restricted to a sin-
gle value of their meta parameter.
3. THE AUTOSTEP METHOD
The main contribution of this paper is our proposed method,
Autostep (see also Mahmood, 2010), that adapts a vector
of step-size parameters without requiring tuning of its meta-
step-size parameter. The method is given in Table 1. Autostep
is based on the IDBD method, which is completely described
by (1) and the following three equations:
αi,k+1 = αi,k exp (µδkxi,khi,k) , (3)
wi,k+1 = wi,k + αi,k+1δkxi,k,
hi,k+1 =

1 − αi,k+1x2
i,k
+
hi,k + αi,k+1δkxi,k,
where the hi,k, i = 1, . . . , n, are auxiliary memory variables,
and µ > 0 is a meta-step-size parameter as in (2).
Insight into why the best value of IDBD’s meta-step-size pa-
rameter varies from problem to problem can be gained by
doing a unit analysis of its update equations. The quantity
δkxi,khi,k appearing in its main update equation (3) has units
of y2
(where y is the target output). To maintain the units of
αi in (3), the meta-step size µ must have the inverse units,
that is, units of 1/y2
(so that the exponentiated quantity is
unitless). Hence, problems with different variances of target
outputs will require very different µs, and thus we see the
shifts in the first panel of Figure 1. Similar is true for all the
other step-size adaptation methods except ALAP. In ALAP,
the meta-step-size parameter is normalized so that it is unit-
less. However, in our experiments, the meta-step-size param-
eter of ALAP required tuning across problems. This is due to
the fact that the normalizer in ALAP is estimated as a running
average and it requires a number of iterations before mitigat-
ing the effect of units. Hence, a sudden change can abruptly
affect its step-size update.
A second problem that leads to parameter dependence in
IDBD is that the best range of µ is narrow. This range also
lies close to the value of µ for which IDBD starts to diverge.
If the step-size parameter can be checked against growing
large, a large µ may not result in such instability. None of
the step-size adaptation methods including ALAP consider
this issue; this is another potential reason why ALAP was not
effective in avoiding parameter tuning.
There are step-size adaptation methods that are not based on
meta gradient descent, such as SGD-QN (Bordes et al., 2009)
and those proposed by Sompolinsky et al. (1995) and Murata
et al. (1996). These methods incrementally update the step-
size parameter as a running average of some statistics, such as
the squared error or the norm of the gradient. These methods
contain tunable meta parameters as well. We investigated the
dependence of these methods on their meta parameters and
found similar shifts in their performance curves. We observed
that the shifts in these methods occur for similar reasons as for
methods based on meta gradient descent (e.g., due to units of
meta parameters).
Table 1. The Autostep Method
Initialization:
Set µ and τ as appropriate (e.g., 10−2
and 104
)
for i = 1, . . . , n:
hi ← vi ← 0
Initialize wi and αi as desired (e.g., 0 and 0.1)
for each new data sample (x1, . . . , xn, y):
δ ← y −
Pn
i=1 wixi
for i = 1, . . . , n:
vi ← max |δxihi|, vi + 1
τ αix2
i (|δxihi| − vi)

(4)
if vi 6= 0:
αi ← αi exp

µδxihi
vi

(5)
M ← max
Pn
i=1 αix2
i , 1

(6)
for i = 1, . . . , n:
αi ← αi
M (7)
wi ← wi + αiδxi
hi ← hi 1 − αix2
i

+ αiδxi
To produce the Autostep method shown in Table 1, we in-
troduced two modifications to IDBD that together eliminate
the dependence of performance on the meta-step-size param-
eter. The first modification mitigates the shift in the best range
of µ across problems, and the second modification reduces
the sensitivity of performance to µ within the same problem
by reducing the step-size parameter whenever it would cause
overshooting. The method involves slightly more computa-
tion per step than IDBD, but note that its time and memory
complexity still scales linearly with the number of input fea-
tures.
The first modification of IDBD to produce Autostep is to nor-
malize each step-size update component δxihi with a running
maximum of its absolute values (see (4) in Table 1). As a
consequence, the normalized term δxihi/vi in (5) of Table
1 becomes unitless, its value cannot be more than 1.0, and
a sudden change in the target output cannot abruptly affect
the step-size update. Note that the update of the normalizer
vi uses αi in such a way that its speed of tracking is self-
regulated.
To understand the second modification, consider the quantity
Pn
i=1 αi,k+1x2
i,k, which might be called the effective step size
for step k. If this quantity is one half, then the error on a single
data sample would have been reduced by one half. In general,
letting δ0
k denote the error on kth step after the weight up-
date (δ0
k = yk −
Pn
i=1 wi,k+1xi,k), then a simple calculation
shows that
δk−δ0
k
δk
=
Pn
i=1 αi,k+1x2
i,k. It follows then that if
the effective step size is greater than one, then we will over-
shoot the minimum error. The second modification computes
the effective step size and, if it is greater than one, scales α
so that the effective step size is one (see (6) and (7) in Ta-
ble 1). The overall effect is to make overshooting, and thus
divergence, literally impossible for Autostep.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The performance of Autostep on our two idealized and six
robot problems is shown in the middle panel of Figure 1. In
contrast to the performance of IDBD, shown in the first panel,
the performance of Autostep did not shift with respect to µ
across problems. Curves with the same color in the two pan-
els are for the same problems. With µ = 10−2
, Autostep
achieved near-best performance on all problems.
It remains unclear why µ = 10−2
performs best for Autostep
and whether this would be true generally. Examining the up-
date rules reveals that this value permits step sizes to change
by about 1% per step. Thus, it takes at least 70 steps to double
or halve a step size, which is fairly fast, while leaving enough
time to cancel out noisy fluctuations.
A second way in which Autostep is superior to and less pa-
rameter dependent than IDBD is that it eliminates the need
to tune the initial step size. Recall that IDBD required sig-
nificant tuning of the initial step size for the two classes of
problems, whereas Autostep used the same value (0.1) for all
of them. In fact, Autostep’s performance as measured here is
nearly insensitive to the initial step size. It does have some
effect on initial performance, but we have found that it is easy
to find an excellent initial step size for Autostep using the
standard rules of thumb for LMS, for example, by using 0.1
divided by the expected norm of the input feature vectors.
The third and final parameter of Autostep, τ, was 104
on all
problems in our experiments. Autostep’s performance was
not strongly dependent on τ, though further exploration of a
wider range of problems, and particularly of a wider range of
problem durations, is needed before a definitive statement can
be made. As a rule of thumb, we recommend setting τ to the
number of data samples expected to be needed for learning.
The utility of Autostep as a tuning free method is clearly
shown in the final panel of Figure 1, which shows perfor-
mance of all methods, averaged across problems, as a func-
tion of their meta parameter. Autostep performed dramati-
cally better than not only all the other step-size adaptation
methods, but also the Recursive Least Squares (RLS) algo-
rithm, a widely used linear learning algorithm when one can
afford quadratic per-step complexity. (The meta parameter
for RLS here is its forgetting factor.) Only Autostep achieved
an overall satisfactory performance with a single parameter
setting.
Autostep can be extended in interesting ways. Extensions to
nonlinear settings would make tuning-free step-size adapta-
tion possible for artificial neural networks. Extensions to re-
inforcement learning would be natural given that many re-
inforcement learning problems are inherently nonstationary.
We are currently exploring extensions of Autostep to online
temporal-difference learning.
5. REFERENCES
Almeida, L. B., Langlois, T., Amaral, J. D., and Plakhov, A. (1998).
Parameter adaptation in stochastic optimization. In Saad, D. (Ed.),
On-Line Learning in Neural Networks, pp. 111–134. Cambridge
University Press.
Benveniste, A., Métivier, M., and Priouret, P. (1990). Adaptive algo-
rithms and stochastic approximations. Springer-Verlag.
Bordes, A., Bottou, L., and Gallinari, P. (2009). SGD-QN: Care-
ful quasi-Newton stochastic gradient descent. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 10:1737–1754.
Bray, M., Koller-Meier, E., Müller, P., Gool, L. V., and Schraudolph,
N. N. (2004). 3D hand tracking by rapid stochastic gradient de-
scent using a skinning model. In Proc. Intl. Conf. Artificial Neural
Networks, pp. 59–68.
Buttfield, A., Ferrez, P. W., and Millán, R. J. del. (2006). Towards
a robust BCI: Error potentials and online learning. IEEE Trans.
Neural Sys. Rehab. Eng., 14:164–168.
Jacobs, R. A. (1988). Increased rates of convergence through learn-
ing rate adaptation. Neural Networks, 1(4):295–307.
Kushner H. J., and Yang, J. (1995). Analysis of adaptive step size SA
algorithms for parameter tracking. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
40:1403–1410.
Mahmood A. (2010). Automatic step-size adaptation in incremental
supervised learning. Master’s thesis, Department of Computing
Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8.
Murata, N., Müller, K. R., Ziehe, A., and Amari, S. (1996). Adaptive
on-line learning in changing environments. In: Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 9, pp. 312–318. MIT press.
RLAI (2010). daylong04.crtrlog.gz. Critterbot. Retrieved June 1,
2010, from http://critterbot.rl-community.org/logs.
Schaal, S., Atkeson, C., and Vijayakumar, S. (2001). Scalable tech-
niques from nonparametric statistics for real-time robot learning.
Applied Intelligence, 17(1):49–60.
Schraudolph, N. N. (1999). Local gain adaptation in stochastic gra-
dient descent. In: Proc. Intl. Conf. Artificial Neural Networks, pp.
569–574.
Sompolinsky, H., Barkai, N., and Seung, H. S. (1995). Online learn-
ing of dichotomies: Algorithms and learning curves. In Neural
networks: The statistical mechanics perspective. Proceedings of
the CTP-PBSRI Joint Workshop on Theoretical Physics, pp. 105–
130. Singapore: World Scientific.
Sutton, R. S. (1981). Adaptation of learning rate parameters. In:
Goal Seeking Components for Adaptive Intelligence: An Initial
Assessment, by A. G. Barto and R. S. Sutton. Air Force Wright
Aeronautical Laboratories Technical Report AFWAL-TR-81-
1070. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio 45433.
Sutton, R. S. (1992a). Adapting bias by gradient descent: An incre-
mental version of delta-bar-delta. In Proc. 10th National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 171–176.
Sutton, R. S. (1992b). Gain adaptation beats least squares? In Proc.
of the 7th Yale Workshop on Adaptive and Learning Systems, pp.
161–166.
